So, I am joined once again by Chris, and
we're going to be going through part two
of our coverage of how Rome lost its
republic. Again, if you missed part one,
feel free to check that out. That was us
kind of laying out the systemic troubles
that were plaguing Rome, and then in
this one we're going to be following
through on Well, just how do all the
dominoes fall? What's the consequence of
the rot at the foundation of the
republic? And uh we're going to be
starting up here with a summary just to
get you guys reacquainted with uh sort
of what we covered. Uh but feel free to
skip ahead to the timestamps if you are
already familiar with these topics. Uh
so, Chris, why don't you again kind of
introduce yourself real quickly for
newcomers, and then we'll get started
with the part one?
Yeah, hey guys. Uh if you weren't here
for part one, uh my name is Chris. I'm
an uh Roman historian. I've been working
with Invicta for about seven years now.
Um I mostly study uh economic and social
history, though I do write a lot of
military history as well.
Excellent. So, kicking off this summary
of part one, we talked a lot, but just
in brief, a couple things to mention is
we're looking at this timeline of kind
of the history of Rome, kingdom to
republic to empire. If we're looking at
the fall of the republic, really uh
different scholars and different
discussions will frame sort of the fall
of the republic to be any sort of time
frame.
Uh uh
You could even say that the foundation
of the republic itself set itself up for
failure. So, main point was, "Hey, you
can choose any time period." Uh we had
gone over mostly events happening at the
end of the I think it was the Second
Punic War, and really closing in on the
kind of late 2nd century into the 1st
century. So, that was our main
area of focus. That's what this
magnifying represents. We went over even
in this small period, this is where
stuff escalates. We went over the huge
succession of wars, the big changes to
the government that were happening at
the time, uh political turmoil interior
and exterior to Rome. So, a lot was
happening. So,
the main caveat here was like, "A lot of
people have their take on the fall of
the republic." We started with sort of
the end of the Second Punic War and kind
of followed the rot from there.
And Chris had presented three sort of
major pillars of, you know, discussion.
So, Chris, why don't you go ahead and
introduce these and kind of recap them
briefly?
Yeah, so for a quick recap, we were
looking at the consequences of Rome's
constant wars. And these were magnified
by the fact that many of these wars were
away from the Italian Peninsula. They
were either in the provinces or they
were foreign wars. We've got a little
map just showing a small snippet of
where a lot of these wars were. And
because Rome's governmental system and
military system were based around a
city-state, that didn't work all that
well. You can't really send a militia to
do wars all over the place that are far
away and many years long
without a degradation in your society at
home because the militia can't come
home. So, you start seeing citizens lose
their money because they're not really
being paid all that much to be a part of
the militia.
Families aren't able to hold onto their
family wealth because the person who's
supposed to be making the money and
productivity is out in the militia all
the time. And thus, you start seeing a
major weakening of citizens at home.
The wealth that is produced by all these
foreign wars and all the wealth that is
basically being funneled upwards from
these, you know, small farm holders
is very much heavily consolidated among
the ultra-wealthy. They buy all these
farms, they turn them into large
consolidated estates that then just make
cash crops, like cows, wine, etc. Not
exactly things that are
uh subsistence for for the vast majority
of people. And these were known as the
latifundia.
These large conglomerated corporations
effectively the made the rich get richer
and took that money directly from the
poor.
As a result, you start seeing this
K-shaped economy. The rich are absurdly
absurdly corrupt, um, and they control
the entire government, which has
effectively meant that both the
politicians and the people who are
bankrolling the politicians are equally
corrupt in many ways, and people really
really see and internalize this. So, the
final real pillar is
going all the way back to what I said at
the start. Rome's government was built
for city-state. It was not, you know, we
we have a whole discussion on the
meaning of the word republic in part
one. This is a city-state government.
Every time Rome expands, and a new
problem has to be confronted,
uh, they're like, "Okay, we'll put in
this temporary law. We'll put in this,
uh, little band-aid to try to, you know,
fix this problem for now." And then that
band-aid kind of becomes permanent
because it sort of kind of works.
The problem is when that band-aid
doesn't work, or when someone decides to
ignore the band-aid because it's just a
band-aid. It's just a norm. It's not a
law, so like, it's not really super
illegal to tear that off until you start
doing that to laws themselves. So, you
start seeing a shattering of the norms
just because these norms, these
band-aids, are no longer functioning
properly. And so, the people trying to
cling to them are actively harming the
system. The people are infuriated by
this, and they elect reactionaries who
destroy the norms as much as possible,
but they don't really leave a solid
construction behind them.
So, that's kind of where we're, uh,
starting this episode is there's an
enormous amount of social unrest that's
being caused by a huge number of
underlying problems.
Yeah, I think that's a great take. So,
if you want to learn more about that and
you missed it, go back and watch part
one uh, to get those details. But I
think without further ado, we can move
on to yeah, the the domino effect of how
this all unfolds.
All right, so this section is going to
be tipping points and civil war. Thus
far we've been talking really a lot
about the root of the kind of rot
setting foot in the city of Rome, the
tension between the rich and poor. It's
really been centered on how Rome itself
is built up. But it's important to note
that this rot extends beyond just the
city of Rome. It's actually expanding to
the kind of entire pseudo empire of the
republic being constructed. One of the
major friction points actually turns out
is going to be between the city of Rome
and its sort of unequal system alliances
with the allies across Italy. And this
is also subject to a lot of the kind of
disparities that the people are seeing.
It also kind of is reflected by the
allies. And so we're going to be going
over a little bit of this kind of big
social war, which is between Rome and
her allies. And what that really does is
it opens the door for the idea that
well, Italians are fighting Italians,
Romans are going to be fighting Romans.
And that really opens the door to it
sort of being normalized. And it just
leads to you know, bloodshed within
Italy proper, not from a foreign
invader. And that again opens the door
strong men who are going to come in and
just kind of seize the reins of power
through brute force.
So yeah, Chris, why don't you get us
started with the first social war here.
All right, so the social war, the roots
of the social war really go back all the
way to the second Punic War when
Hannibal was in Italy. And
like I mentioned in the first segment,
Hannibal had been ravaging through Italy
for 20 years. And it was a generational
memory that just was incredibly
traumatic, frankly, for the the Roman
spirit.
But what he'd been doing was actually
quite interesting. He hadn't besieged
Rome or attacked the city itself,
frankly.
He just went past it into the deep south
of the Italian peninsula. And those were
Rome's allies. Those were relatively new
conquests of Rome who were
allies and client states to Rome. And
his theory was if he could damage these
client states enough, if he could cause
them enough pain, they would either
split away from Rome and join him to
fight Rome itself, or their pain would
force Rome to come to the negotiation
table begging for a peace treaty.
It didn't work, but it caused
generational damage to these areas in
the south. It where he burned down
cities multiple times. He would take
their money, their wealth multiple
times. He would
force them to capitulate to him. The
Romans would then force that city to
capitulate back, and then Hannibal would
continue.
So, this attempt to really split the
allies kind of left some deep cracks
that were papered over and then never
addressed again. One of Hannibal's
constant constant points to these people
was, "Hey, Rome is treating you guys
like dirt. You're basically being
treated like dogs by Rome. You're not
even second-class citizens because
second-class citizens actually have
rights. These people had very few rights
as  allies to Rome other than,
well, Rome probably won't attack you."
So, that was Hannibal's big talking
point. And then we zoom forward, you
know, about 60, 70 years to the Gracchus
brothers, and you really start seeing
these that these cracks have just
festered, and there's a lot of
disgruntlement with Rome itself that is
only made worse by the older Gracchus
brother. Because when he got his
agricultural commission together, he's
they promptly were like, "Okay, we'll
we'll take the public lands for the
Roman citizens." The public lands was
basically all the lands that the allies
owned, and that the allies had been on
for, you know, hundreds of years. There
that was their farmland. Those were
their farmers, and it was being ripped
from them just so that way Roman
citizens could take the land.
That didn't go over very well as as as
you can imagine. And so,
uh Gaius Gracchus, the younger Gracchus
brother, was like, "Well, you know what?
That is true. It's kind of unjust. Why
don't we make these people citizens?"
That statement was incredibly unpopular
in the city of Rome, and actually cost
Gaius Gracchus his office as tribune. Um
he was eventually murdered as a result,
but this proposition to make these
people citizens
wasn't popular in Rome at all, but the
statement took fire in these allied
communities. And they were like, "Hey,
why not make us citizens? We've been
fighting for you guys for hundreds of
years. We've been loyal to you for
hundreds of years.
Our sons have died many times over.
We've given you resources. We've given
you food. We've given you our very
uh the land that we've inherited from
our forefathers. The least you can do is
give us citizenship."
And Rome said, "No."
So,
as you might imagine, these people were
not particularly happy with that
outcome. So, they wanted, you know, they
wanted voting rights to at least, you
know, govern themselves. They wanted the
ability to not be arbitrarily beaten
because that was something that the
Romans did if they didn't like what one
of them had done. They could just beat
them on the spot. Like, flogging for no
reason whatsoever.
So,
they effectively were like, "Okay, so
we're going to take our toys, and we're
going to make our own Roman Empire." So,
they basically created a mirror republic
just in 91. They elected their own
consuls. They minted their own coins.
They were the Roman Republic except
without Rome in it because they were
like, "Okay, everyone here is citizens."
Somehow the Romans didn't see this
coming. And so, you know, they panicked.
All of their armies were away. You had
armies in Spain. You had armies in
Greece. You had armies XYZ. You didn't
have any armies defending Italy at this
point. And these rebels raised 100,000
men.
Which is a massive force. So, all of the
consuls quickly get recalled. Everyone's
panicking. They
the Romans
uh uh
put Gaius Marius at the head of the
Roman armies again. And this man has not
been consul for years. He's basically
He's been consul six times at this
point. Um and his uh like great
lieutenant is a man named Sulla.
And so, they're able to actually
consolidate. And with a mixture of
military and diplomacy, they're able to
drive the allies back. The diplomatic
outreach is basically saying, "Hey,
if you guys stop being rebels, uh we'll
give you citizenship." And the rebels
are like, "Sure, that's what we wanted
in the first place." So, most of these
rebelling cities
actually came right back into the Roman
fold after they'd been promised
citizenship. The rest were actually
defeated on the field of battle. And
that's where you really see,
you know, multiple major battles between
Italians. Technically, it's not between
Romans, but this is between people who
are Roman in all but name. They fight
the same way. They have the same
equipment. They have the same battle
tactics and strategy.
They it's essentially Rome's first major
civil war.
And uh
by the time it's resolved 3 years later,
the it didn't actually particularly heal
the wound because they tried to throw
more bandages on top of it.
Yeah, that's another important thing to
mention is often you'll see this
recapped as like, "Okay, the allies got
citizenship." But practically, how how
that works in an ancient government that
tries to make these laws, it's just
another set of bandages. The idea for
instance where before in the city of
Rome you had these different tribal
groups that came together and it was
originally based off where you were
located in the city. Yeah, it kind of
worked as the city grew. Now they have
to somehow apply these tribal groups to
like an entire peninsula. Everything
just gets even messier. There's like
more It adds more friction to the system
which causes more opportunities for it
being gummed up and it just makes the
whole system kind of worse in theory.
Exactly. And if if I can just, you know,
put out a hypothetical question, how are
these people supposed to vote? Because
voting has to be held at a specific
physical location in the city of Rome.
Remember it's a city-state government,
so everything has to be centered in
Rome. These people from far-flung cities
can't just travel every single time
there's a vote or an election. They
can't really participate in the civic
process which is a law might be
introduced to the people at any point in
time. And so they they have rights, but
those rights have big air quotes around
them.
Yes.
Um but more so for the the vein of like
tipping into civil war, the biggest
point here is just the shedding of blood
on Italian soil between Italians
essentially.
Um and and in particular the key
characters who do leave it lead it,
Marius and Sulla, they're going to show
up again as we continue our story. So
this gets us into the next one which is
essentially these two erstwhile
um
comrades in arms are going to turn
against one another. And it more has to
do with um kind of who's going to take
the reins of the Roman military and
political system moving forward. As it
gets gummed up, it's more about who has
the most armies, the most power, the
most influence, the most ability to butt
to bully their rivals out of the
position. These two people were kind of
coming out of that prior war as top
dogs, and now they're going to sort of
snipe at each other as they have been, I
think, in prior years. Um
but now with the immediate threat
cleared, it really rears its head. So,
Chris, kind of take us through this this
unfolding thing that results on the
first march on Rome.
Yeah, so there was actually a major
Well, the Romans called him a major
threat in the East, and his name was
Mithridates, and he was, in a lot of
ways, the last of the successor kings,
uh the successors of Alexander.
He was the king of a very wealthy nation
called Pontus, and he repeatedly was
attempting to take over the Greeks and
take over Anatolia. He was, you know,
causing trouble in Rome's eastern
provinces, and so Rome had gone to war
with him, which was promptly interrupted
by the Social War. So, they're like,
"Okay,
Social War's done. We're all good.
Everything's stable. We're going to send
an army out off to Greece to, you know,
fight against Pontus again."
And so, they were going to put Sulla at
the head of that army because Sulla was
the consul. Consuls led armies. That's
how the the law worked. That's how
everything worked, etc. But the problem
is politics started creeping in, and
effectively Sulla took control of the
army and went off to Pontus, and a
tribune back in Rome,
who was pro-Marius, introduced a law
that was like, "Oh, let's make Sulla not
the general and actually put Marius in
charge." Because Pontus was a very,
very, very wealthy,
uh nation-state, and whomever was going
to be in charge of this war was going to
make a lot of money and make a lot of
political power. So, they sent
messengers out to Sulla saying, "Um by
the way, you're not in charge of the
army anymore. Congratulations, you've
been demoted. Come back to Rome and
you're probably going to lose any
political power you ever dreamed of
having. Also, probably your family will
live live in shame for the rest of, you
know, the century.
So, Sulla promptly killed those
messengers and basically made a speech
to his army saying, "These politicians
back in Rome suck.
They want me to come back. So, how about
you guys come with me and we can have a
conversation."
So, Sulla brings his army back from
Greece and marches on Rome.
This is the first time this has ever
happened, frankly, especially with a
Roman general in charge, but
this is something completely
unimaginable for the people of Rome.
And, as you can imagine, they promptly
panic. They Marius tries to organize a
last-ditch, last-second defense.
It doesn't work. He's forced to run
away, and Sulla
comes back and says, "Okay, I'm going to
install people. We're going to make sure
everything is clear." And then he heads
right on back to deal with Mithridates.
Mithridates is, you know, still there,
still causing trouble when Sulla
arrives. And so, Sulla heads back in 80
in, you know, between 87 and 84.
But between 87 and 84,
wouldn't you know it, Marius returns
from his exile. Despite the fact that he
has an arrest warrant out for his head,
he still has a lot of influence in the
city. A lot of people basically use him
to try to get their own power. So,
Marius raises an army and he marches on
Rome.
He takes the city. He executes everyone
who is pro-Sulla. He murders a whole
bunch of politicians, and he installs
his own people in power, and then
promptly dies because he's a very old
man at this point.
Sulla, when he hears this,
negotiates a private peace deal with
Mithridates, which, again, if you think
of a general negotiating a private peace
deal in a
in a war, that's insane.
But, that's what Sulla did. And then, he
took his army right on back to Rome. He
fought the pro-Marian faction.
Um he
fought in several battles all the way to
the gates of Rome.
And he won. Uh the the apparently like
it was a very close battle. Uh one of
his young enterprising uh
one of his young enterprising commanders
named Pompey, uh later Pompey the Great,
um apparently was key in him winning
this final battle uh for the city of
Rome. But, he took the city of Rome.
And he was like, "Okay, last time
I tried to be nice about this. I'm not
going to be nice this time."
And so, he instituted a policy of
proscription. Proscription was
effectively
legalized bounty hunting,
where he would put a price on the head
of
the people who disagreed with him, any
politicians who were against him, and
sometimes people who he just thought had
too much money and didn't particularly
like.
The price on their heads was literally
the weight of their head in silver. So,
what people would do is they would chop
off the head of the person who was
wanted, they would fill that head with
lead, and then they would bring it to
get weighed, and they would get a very
nice bounty in silver.
So, all of their property would be
confiscated by the state, so Sulla, and
he would sell it off in these massive
auctions.
And coincidentally, the only people who
were allowed to bid on the properties in
auctions were people that Sulla himself
approved of.
And there's one man in particular who
ends up owning over half of the city of
Rome
because he buys so much property at
these auctions. That man is named um
That man is named Crassus, who is who
quickly becomes the richest man in Rome.
Uh so these proscriptions are absolutely
devastating, effectively shattering and
culling the entire political class.
That comes right after Marius just did
the same thing. So Marius killed
everyone who was pro-Sulla. Sulla killed
everyone who was pro-Marius. So the
people who were left were essentially
like the the spineless ones.
Whoever's listening to this probably can
think of a spineless
politician who kind of goes wherever the
wind leads them. Those were the only
people who were left. They didn't really
have any particular political strength.
They didn't have any particular
political stance on anything. They were
effectively manipulable by whomever
was the big personality of the day.
Then Sulla
did his best to reform the Roman
constitution.
He said, "Okay, all these new rules,
they're dumb and they're the cause of
all of our troubles." And when he says
new rules, he means effectively
everything from the last 100 years.
So he decides, "Okay, we're not going to
do any more of this um
of these grain price balancing programs.
We're not going to do any more of these
uh agrarian reforms. We're not going to
do any more of these tribune vetoes.
We're not going to do any more of these
equestrians on the juries. Only
politician Sorry, only the uh
patricians, the noble class, is allowed
to be on juries."
Et cetera, et cetera. So he's basically
trying to get rid of
all of the changes that had occurred
without acknowledging the fact that the
changes had occurred to fix to band-aid
over major problems. So Sulla,
to continue the metaphor, tears off a
whole bunch of band-aids. He exposes
how bad the wounds in Rome's system
really were, and then decides to leave
and leave them be and says that this is
fine.
You can't do that. You can't And Sulla,
you know, after And to his credit, um he
resigned his dictatorship
after, I think, 1 year.
And he said, "Okay, cool. I'm following
the laws of Rome. I resign my
dictatorship just like you're supposed
to. I return to life as a private
citizen just like you're supposed to."
But the problem is he completely just
bulldozed the entire system of
government that the Romans had done.
He'd ignored any law that he didn't
like. He'd ignored any norm he didn't
like.
And he murdered whoever disagreed with
him.
Which is something that never really got
resolved.
Yes, and this is one of the key things
that you'll be seeing here is
essentially the the transfers of power
is one of the most fundamental things
that kind of prevents you from toppling
down into civil war.
Um in the past, this has been sort of
rectified through conflict of the
orders, trying to have new tribunes or
these other people who can, like Chris
said, paper things over. But with this
first kind of batch of civil wars, the
the transfer of power is essentially
proven best remedied by, "Okay, I'm just
going to march the army back, purge
anyone else. All right, y'all Everyone's
quiet? You agree I'm the ruler? Okay,
cool. Now you declare things are back to
normal." But obviously you've
shown bare how the system just works,
which is basically it's just um might
makes right. So, you can't just come in
here, shatter it, kill all your
opponents, and say, "Okay, now back to
normal."
All you've really shown is, well, the
new normal is to do the same. Uh so, I
think there's this famous quote that we
were trying to dig up, but um
essentially I think
Julius Caesar later muses about Sulla
and says, "Well, one of the main things
he did wrong was giving up power too
soon." Caesar is the one who later on
sort of like, you know, crosses the
Rubicon, and we most think of him as the
one who sort of shattered the Republic,
but he looks back on Sulla as like,
well, you know, the writing was on the
wall at this point. Um what he tried to
do was
not meeting the hour. He should have
just held onto power.
Um and that's kind of showing that in
this era, um
that's essentially the main mechanism
that can work. Um but that doesn't
become quite obvious right away. The
state with Sulla stepping down does kind
of plod forward a little bit, but we're
waiting for the next shoe to drop. And
sort of to emphasize that, we wanted to
cover real quickly the Catiline
Conspiracy, which is this next chapter
as the Republic is kind of sheltered
from these big dictatorial swings.
There's a little moment of pause, but
here once again we lay bare that um
everyone's going to start breaking the
rules. So, Chris, maybe you could cover
this briefly.
Yeah, so the Catiline Conspiracy, again,
we're skipping forward just a little
bit. If you'll notice the dates, we've
skipped forward about 20 years. Not all
that long in the grand scheme of things,
but we're going to go back in time a
little bit in a moment.
But Catiline's Conspiracy is a really
good illustration of not necessarily the
disease, but the symptoms of it. This is
kind of where Sulla had left things and
the
the precedents that he had put in place
that you can kind of do whatever you
want so long as you can get away with
it, so long as you have the power.
So, Sulla, when he finally left the
scene, um
yeah,
frankly, when he was a private citizen,
he still had a lot of uh influence,
but after he died,
um
the political system completely crashed.
There was no faith whatsoever in these
juries, in the legal system, which had
become incredibly political, as you can
expect if it's staffed entirely by
politicians.
Um tribunes were much more symbolic.
They could still introduce legislation
though, which caused a huge amount of
disorder and
a huge amount of chaos.
Um and then most importantly,
it really illustrated that if you call
something national security and then
just ignore every single law to solve it
however you think best,
it doesn't actually help the rule of law
when you're just breaking the rule of
law.
Shocking, I know.
Uh so you see, you know, the consul, the
general, being like, "Hey, I've got a
bigger army.
I can do what I want." And the political
system is just physically incapable of
actually dealing with that.
So Catiline's conspiracy happened during
the consulship of a man named Cicero.
And Cicero is one of the most quietly
important characters in this era of
Roman history, specifically because he
was a very prolific writer. He wrote a
lot of things and we still have a huge
number of those writings and letters and
speeches. And while obviously, you know,
it's slanted, he's not necessarily going
to badmouth himself, he really gives an
illustration into this world of the end
of [snorts] the Republic. He goes You
can see his letters that talk about
Caesar, Octavian, Sulla. Uh you can see
his discussions and his musings about
where things are at. You can see how
like he's a person like any other.
Puts his pants on Well, actually not cuz
he's Roman, but puts his pants on one
leg at a time.
He's not
necessarily, you know, a magnificent
outlier, but he's a really, really,
really beautiful illustration of where
life was at. So this is his consulship
in 63. He's what's known as a new man.
He's His family has never been consul
before, so he's He gets a huge amount of
honor and reputation from doing so, from
being that person. And he'd gone up
against this man named Catiline in the
elections. Catiline was an older name,
and he thought that he was entitled to
the office of consul
because it was his year. This was the
first year he was eligible, and thus he
should be elected that year. Well, he
lost. Cicero won. And he kind of
harbored a grudge against Cicero for
some strange reason, especially because
Catiline had a bunch more money than
Cicero did because he was being
bankrolled by the richest people in
Rome, who had formed something called
the first Triumvirate, or just the
Triumvirate at the time. So, he was
being bankrolled by a man named Crassus.
We mentioned him earlier. He's the
richest man in Rome.
So, Catiline ran again for office in the
next year, and he lost again. Cicero
backed his opponent, and the opponent
beat Catiline yet again. Uh Catiline was
very sad about this. Uh seems to have um
gotten a bit desperate, especially
because he lost all of his financial
backing.
So, Cicero was still consul. This is in
October.
And Cicero So, Cicero's still consul for
a few more months. He gets all these
anonymous letters, probably delivered by
Crassus, to his house, basically saying,
"Hey, Catiline is going to try to
overthrow the government." So, Cicero
brings all these letters to the Senate
and reads them out out loud. And then 3
days later, there are reports that um
that a centurion is forming an army over
in Etruria in favor of Catiline. And so,
this becomes This quickly becomes an
emergency.
And then the south of Italy, there are
reports that there are slave revolts
breaking out down there. So, it's even
more of an emergency. The Senate passes
this senatus consultum ultimum, the
ultimate uh decree of the Senate,
basically saying, "Consuls, do whatever
you need to do for the safety of the
state." It's a national security
emergency. Great. So, there are a couple
of generals who are nearby. They and
their armies are prepping for their
triumphs. Well, their triumphs are going
to be delayed because those generals
have to go handle the crisis. So, one of
them is sent to handle the Catiline
army. One of them is sent to the south
to handle the slave revolt.
Catiline is still in the city. He's
still in the Senate. And so, he's
starting to make plans to leave to join
his army. He's laying plans to set fires
all over Rome to cause chaos. And he
actually sends assassins to Cicero's
home. Those assassins did not succeed,
but we know that there were actually
assassins who attempted to murder Cicero
in his bed.
Um there was, you know, a large
declamation, lots of political drama.
Catiline leaves the city in, quote,
voluntary exile because, you know, he
claims he's been being put upon. But the
moment he leaves the city, he puts on
the consular garb
and says, "I am the rightful consul, and
I'm going to be, uh, taking my rightful
place at the head of Rome." He tries to
bring in the Gallic tribes from the
north.
The The Gauls there are not particularly
interested. They contact Cicero and say,
"Hey, um
this guy's trying to get us down. We're
not actually interested, but thought you
ought to know."
Cicero uses these people as double
agents and says, "Okay,
who else is in on this conspiracy? Who
are the sleeper agents? Who's backing
him?" And they're able to find five
rich, influential politicians who are in
on this conspiracy. And so, these people
are immediately thrown in jail and or
house arrest. Their attempts to break
them out, none of them succeed. So,
these people are in jail. And so, the
Senate is forced to debate, "Okay, what
are we going to do with these people?"
The Roman jails are not actually meant
to hold people for more than the length
of a trial.
But also, they're conspirators who are
attempting to overthrow the government.
And so there's uh, a big debate in the
Senate where Cicero and his fellow
consul and all the former consuls in the
Senate actually argue these men need to
be put to death immediately because they
are a threat to the city, they're a
threat to the Republic.
Caesar
interestingly argues against that. He
says, "You can't put them to death. They
are citizens. You cannot put a citizen
to death without a trial. That's
illegal."
Give them a life sentence in prison.
Incidentally, that was also illegal.
You're not allowed to give a citizen a
life sentence without a trial.
But hey, he's going for this more
moderate tone. That's good to know.
Uh
he didn't carry the day. The Senate
voted that the death penalty would be
applied and Cicero carried it out in
person
um
famously saying after they were executed
just one word in Latin that translates
to they have lived. That's effectively
him saying, "It is done. It's finished."
Uh so these prisoners were executed by
Cicero and the army that Catiline had
been able to muster, which was about
3,000 men, was soundly defeated.
Although apparently they they fought to
the last man.
So Cicero's actions here
have been
debated for frankly forever.
Within 5 years
uh Cicero was actually exiled by a
tribune who introduced a law saying
"Anyone who has executed a Roman citizen
without trial must be exiled."
On paper, like that makes sense because
that was an illegal action that Cicero
took. And so, you know, the big debate
is whether or not is it right to break
the law in a case of emergency
even if your intentions are good.
We're going to come at this from this
perspective because we're kind of
looking at the how Rome lost its
republic and how even if you have good
intentions and even if there is
legitimately an emergency,
if you have no faith in this new legal
system you have so little faith in this
legal system that you cannot trust it to
not give these men justice.
You have absolutely no trust in anyone
outside of okay, we need to do
swift and decisive action now. Um
then where is your basis for government?
Where is your basis for anything that
you're doing?
Just because you have all these good
intentions, just because you know, you
see something that you know, is a severe
emergency doesn't necessarily mean that
you can just break the law and ignore
the law whenever it becomes
inconvenient.
So Cicero, even though like again, from
what it seems we've got a whole ton of
car correspondence from he seems like a
decent guy who is just always trying to
do the right thing in you know, his own
context, but he just becomes yet another
console who ignores the law when it
becomes inconvenient.
Even more so this kind of illustrates
due process and civil rights, it doesn't
matter
if if they become optional,
they do not matter. They effectively do
not exist if the person in charge can
just destroy them whenever
he decides that there seems to be an
emergency that deserves it.
Yes, and that kind of disrupted our
timeline a little bit, but we thought it
was illustrative of just kind of how the
system functions and how you can no
longer rely on the rules and norms and
how everyone's now essentially even
people who seem to have the best uh head
on their shoulders, even they are going
to have to take extreme measures because
they can't trust the the system to kind
of solve the the problems. Um, but this
now snaps us back to this next part,
which is going to be the strongmen and
aggregation of power. Um, there's a lot
of other people who have realized this
quicker than Cicero. And this seems to
be the people who have been just
gobbling up power and aggrandizing
themselves. And in this period, it kind
of boils down to
uh, a group of strongmen who is going to
form the kind of the first triumvirate.
So, we're going to go over that and how
they eventually come to blows and sort
of the big civil war of Caesar.
So, that's where we're heading next. And
uh, yeah, let's go ahead and zoom in and
get started here. I guess Chris, can you
set us up with who are the sort of major
um, legs of this triumvirate?
Yeah, so we're looking at three major
players here. And remember earlier, uh,
we had Marius and Sulla come in and kill
everybody who wasn't, you know, who had
a spine, frankly. So, effectively you're
left with a very gutted political
landscape. And that basically a vac-
nature abhors a vacuum, right? So,
people rush in to fill this vacuum. And
so, you start seeing these major figures
who
effectively take and agglomerate all of
this power just for themselves as
individuals rather than a uh, a larger
state. So, the first one is Pompey,
known as Pompey the Great. He was
Sulla's big uh,
upcoming up-and-coming commander. And
after even after, you know, Sulla's
proscriptions, he became more and more
and more famous and powerful. He was
in some ways he was the Senate's hatchet
man, but also he kind of told the Senate
where to swing him.
He was sent to uh, Spain for a number of
years to deal with a a guerrilla war
there that um, was remarkably persistent
that was caused by a general that who
had served under Marius. If you'd like
us to do an episode on the Sertorian
War, please let us know in the comments.
But Pompey
in that war it was actually really quite
interesting because, you know, he's a
very ambitious guy and
he keeps demanding more and more
resources again to just deal with this
one guerrilla upstart that he just can't
quash.
And the Senate at one point is like,
"Hey, you're asking for a lot here." And
Pompey says, "Yep, and if you don't give
it to me, I'm going to take my army and
we're going to walk into Rome. We're
going to murder every single one of you
and we're going to take what we need for
ourselves."
You might be shocked to hear the Senate
gave him what he asked for.
So, he was kind of a brutish man,
but he was also very very very very
cunning as a politician. He knew how to
get what he wanted and he knew where his
place was in this new world. He was a
muscle and he was not afraid to use that
muscle to punch whoever he didn't like.
He wasn't necessarily given all the
respect he thought he deserved,
but he was very heavily respected.
The second pillar
leg of this chair, I suppose, was a man
named Crassus. We mentioned him a couple
times. He's the richest man in Rome and
the way he got there was he was
effectively a vulture who ate all of the
properties that Sulla basically sold for
super cheap.
Other ways, apparently, he did it were
he established a fire brigade in Rome,
which sounds great. Like it was a city
that was terrified of fire and he
was so wealthy he bought a whole bunch
of slaves who were trained
professionally and they made sure that
their only job was fighting. That's
great.
Well,
it turns out that he likely started
setting fires or
had [clears throat] fires set by, you
know, people in his orbit at properties
that he just happened to want to buy.
And so he'd park his slave fire brigade
right outside that fire and say, "Hey,
I want to buy that property, the one
that's currently on fire." And he would
not let his slaves put out that fire
until the person sold him the property.
So he was
a also a very brutal man in a different
way.
The one thing he never really had though
was a military pedigree, and that was
effectively essential for any sort of
major power in the in the Roman
Republic. Is you had to have that
military a gravitas behind you. So when
there was a major slave revolt,
uh also known as the Spartacus War or
the third third Servile War, um
Crassus jumped at the opportunity to
help. He raised his own private army
with his own money. He equipped them out
of his own money. He trained them with
his own money. He led them against
Spartacus, and he actually managed to
beat the slave rebellion.
That's cool. The problem is the Romans
didn't really see
beating slaves as a major military
accomplishment. So he wasn't actually
acknowledged for any of this.
So you have Crassus, again, the richest
man in Rome. He can effectively do
whatever he wants with his money because
he has an unlimited amount of money.
All he wants is more prestige. And the
only way for him to get it is
A, through politicians who are not
himself, and through potentially a
military campaign eventually.
Anyway, those two, Pompey and Crassus,
weren't necessarily the biggest fans of
each other. They both had very big
personalities, and they realized if you
put them both in the same room,
eventually that one of them is going to
murder the other one. So they needed a
third person to kind of be the check on
both of them. And so they found this
very ambitious upstart, younger man
named Caesar.
And Caesar wanted to be consul in the
year 60 because that was his year. And
as we've established, when you're an old
old-blooded politician, you want to be
consul in your year, the first year you
are eligible to be consul.
He was very well known for being
he'd very much embraced the it is better
to be talked about than care about what
people are saying about so he was a very
flamboyant man. He did all sorts of
scandalous things with other people's
wives, etc. There were rumors about him
doing them with the husbands too, but he
was effectively very very very good at
putting himself in the press. He was
very good at always being in the
conversation, always being involved in
whatever was going on.
He was younger than the other two, but
he was the ambitious politician. So,
they backed him in the consulship for 60
BC and he won.
Great.
Problem is he was so influential that
his fellow consul was effectively put
under house arrest and
people were joking that the consulship
was actually the consulship of Julius
and Caesar because there was no actual
other consul. The other consul claimed
that no business could be done because
he saw bad omens every day.
Julius Caesar didn't like that norm
/ law and therefore ignored it and went
around business as usual
because that law was extremely
inconvenient because the other consul
was trying to prevent anything from
getting done.
In some ways, it makes sense of him
ignoring the other consul. In other
ways, it's another law that's getting
ignored. You guys might start to see a
pattern here.
So, this is where you really see this
period of performance politics taking
off where it's politicians are
incredibly individualistic. Everything
is about themselves, nothing is really
about the greater good in any way,
shape, or form. Every single one of
these people
Pompey, Crassus, and Caesar are very
emblematic of people at the times. They
just happen to be the three most
powerful who managed to make this
alliance
that
that boosted all of them up to the top.
Corruption was it wasn't even a question
of whether or not you were going to be
corrupt. It was a question of how
corrupt you were going to be. Caesar had
actually been proconsul before this and
he had looted Spain to the point where
he was facing corruption charges but
couldn't be charged because he ran for
consul. He was notoriously brutal when
he stripped that entire
province of its money.
And
that was just very emblematic of every
politician. You wanted to get money and
wealth? Steal it from other people. Just
strip it from other people, you know,
give them exorbitant taxes and skim like
70% for yourself. There weren't One One
actual thing I did want to emphasize to
you really fast.
Um
there was no political party climate in
Rome. There were no political parties.
People like to talk about the Optimates
and the Populares and those are
different styles of presenting yourself
as a politician, but there were no
parties, as it were. We in the modern
day, we, you know, we all see these
political parties. Some countries have
about 20, some have two, but
we don't really have a system like this
where it's all about the individual.
And so, you really That's part of the
reason you really see these people who
just have large whirlpools around them
who are able to command so much
authority because other people want to
skim off of that as much as they
possibly can.
Um so, that's Caesar. He His consulship,
like I don't want to say it was
unremarkable, but if we go beat by beat
through everyone's consulship, we'll
never stop talking. One of the major
things he did at the very tail end of
his consulship was he organized himself
to be put uh, in charge of Roman Gaul,
which, uh, is this little yellow portion
that we see here,
um, at the bottom of France and a little
bit of northern Italy. He organized for
Crassus to be in charge of Roman Syria,
which is I mean, it's a large portion of
the Middle East, and Pompey would be the
man who took care of affairs in Rome.
So, this is where you really see this
house of cards kind of power structure
be built.
Yes, and we won't have time to cover all
of the, kind of, campaigns of these
various politicians, but what we're
seeing here is
before Marius, Sulla, they're trying to
claim Rome as, kind of, sole dictators,
purge the opposition, and we see how
these swings don't really work. And
then, to Chris's point, in this period,
there's kind of a new, sort of,
power-sharing agreement between the
powerful men. We're not quite going to
come to blows, and, huh, this kind of
works. We'll just divide up the empire
amongst ourselves. But, obviously, as,
uh, kind of,
time progresses,
something's going to happen to one part
of the, kind of, the the triple alliance
here, and as that domino falls, then
it's going to leave two to fight with
each other, and it's the whole system
falls apart. So, quickly, Chris, can you
show us, sort of, how
the first triumvirate collapses and how
this leads to then Caesar, um, kind of,
coming to open conflict with his
opposition.
Yeah, so, again, we're going to try to
do this very quickly. I apologize to all
of our viewers who would love a
beat-by-beat of the Gallic Wars. It's
really fascinating. We could do an
episode series on that. Post it in the
comments if you want it. Um, but long
story short, Caesar started, uh, illegal
war against the Gauls who were outside
of his mandate and executed that war
against them over the next
significant amount of, like, the next 8
years.
Um
meanwhile Crassus, who was appointed in
Syria, decided that he wanted to engage
in a war of his own. And so, he mustered
his army that he got as the proconsul of
uh of a province, and he decided to
randomly lead it against the Parthians,
who were effectively the Persian the
successor of the Persian Empire.
The problem is uh
he, like many people before him, like
many people after him, severely
underestimated, first off, deserts.
Uh secondly, the power of horse archers
and or
warriors who are not necessarily going
to stand in a line of battle.
His army was ambushed multiple times.
His supply lines were annihilated. He
was trapped in the middle of nowhere,
and his army was effectively turned into
a pin cushion by these horse archers.
The Romans were completely incapable of
presenting any sort of real defense or
offense against these people, who would
just melt away and continue, you know,
coming right back behind and just
shooting more arrows.
So, Crassus dies in frankly a very
ignominious fashion, a very like this is
a very tragic death, especially for a
Roman, to just be completely helpless
before
uh a foe who is clearly more powerful.
He lost his entire army.
And so,
the problem is now there are two people
in this triumvirate. One is Caesar, who
is engaging in his illegal war in Gaul
and getting a lot of money and
popularity for doing that. The other one
is Pompey, who is in charge of all the
politics in Rome, and therefore is
keeping all of the senators in Rome
under his iron fist.
And those senators are also influencing
him.
So, Pompey is like
Caesar's getting really popular over
there and really really wealthy over
there and he's got an army over there
and I want to be in charge of Rome. Why
do I need Caesar anymore?
Caesar kind of feels the same way and
also Caesar has done
you I'm not sure if you've been keeping
count a lot of illegal things through
the last, you know,
10 12 years of his life.
Besides looting Spain, besides looting
Gaul, besides starting an illegal war in
Gaul, besides, you know, proclaiming
himself the governor of greater Gaul
instead of just Roman Gaul.
He's also being corrupt as heck on the
on the side. So,
the Romans
they have this really really really
interesting dichotomy where you are not
allowed to be put on trial if you are
actively holding a magistracy. Which
makes sense. You don't necessarily want
all of your politicians while they're
serving in politics to be constantly
bombarded by potentially frivolous
lawsuits. I get it.
So, Caesar's logic was, well,
if I'm just in office all the time, I
can do as much crime as I want and I get
away with it.
Cuz that's what the law says he can do.
So, that's what Caesar does.
Um
but the problem is he needs to get
reelected. His proconsulship ends in 50
BC.
And so, in, you know, he has to
negotiate the ability to stand in
abstentia, which is not a thing you can
normally do. You have to get special
permission to basically be able to say,
"Hey, I'm going to put my name forward
for election, but I'm not going to be in
the city of Rome." Traditionally, you
have to be in the city of Rome.
Most other people who, you know, aren't
facing a whole bunch of different
trials, uh a whole bunch of, again,
cannot re-emphasize this enough,
kangaroo courts that are currently
completely loaded with people who hate
Caesar.
And
um
Yeah, so Caesar's like, "Hey,
let me run
from afar." And uh Pompey says,
"No.
You have to come back to Rome to do
that. And also, there's an arrest
warrant out for you, and you will be
giving up your proconsulship the moment
you cross into Italy. Good luck."
And uh for some reason, Caesar didn't
want to be arrested. Um so, he brought
his army across the Alps, but still
within Gaul. He's still the governor of
Gaul. He's allowed to do this. He's
allowed to have his army in northern
Italy
because that's legal.
So, he's like, "I'm just bringing my
army here because we've been so
victorious in Gaul that you're going to
give us a triumph, and I want my army
nearby so that they don't have to
suffer, you know, the logistics
difficulties of crossing the mountains.
Oh my goodness, it was just better to
bring them over here."
So, Caesar brings his army into northern
Italy.
The Senate sees this and is like,
"Caesar's about to invade." Pompey sees
this and is like, "Caesar's about to
invade." Frankly, everyone with a brain
sees this and is like, "Caesar's about
to invade if he doesn't get his way."
And so, the Senate says, "Nope, you
cannot run in absentia, and also, we're
declaring a state of emergency, the
senatus consultum ultimum."
And they basically say, "Hey, uh Pompey,
you're in charge.
Deal with this emergency in whichever
way you see best fit." And so, he puts
out and he puts out a more official
Caesar is persona non grata, kill on
sight  capture on site for trial.
And so, Caesar's like,
"Well, that sucks." And so, he brings
his army across the Rubicon River, which
is the border between his province of
Gaul and Italy. And so, he marches
against Rome.
For some reason, the Senate had not been
expecting this.
Don't ask me why. For some reason,
Pompey had not been expecting this.
Again,
don't ask me why, and they did not have
an army prepared to defend Italy against
Caesar. So, the Senate and Pompey
quickly flee the peninsula to Greece to
raise their armies, to get all their
supporters together to stop Caesar.
Caesar's able to go into Rome
uncontested. He effectively stabilizes
things there, um gets rid of everyone
who disagrees with him slash he doesn't
like, but he doesn't murder them.
He practices a policy of clemency, where
he says, "You know what? You don't agree
with me, but that's okay. You lose your
position.
I'm not going to keep you in your
position, but get to keep your life. I'm
not going to steal your stuff. Like,
it's fine.
I'm just retiring you."
Um that uh definitely was a policy that
he did. Um
So, unfortunately, we're going to just
yada yada Caesar's Civil War a little
bit. Caesar goes to Greece. He
eventually wins against Pompey's forces.
He follows Pompey's forces to Egypt
where they attempt to escape. Pompey's
killed in Egypt by the Egyptians.
Caesar's kind of pissed off about this
because they've murdered a Roman
citizen. Caesar turns Greece Sorry,
Caesar turns Egypt into a Roman province
after this point. Uh the remainder of
the Senate faction that was trying to
resist Caesar tries to flee across North
Africa where they get wiped out and
either commit suicide or are killed or
brought in back into the fold. Again,
Caesar forgives most of these people
for, you know, standing against him,
which they are legally obligated to do.
So, Caesar returns to Rome, declares
himself dictator for life, and spends a
few years as dictator of Rome while
bouncing around between different
provinces.
And while he's preparing to engage in a
retribution campaign against Parthia
because they had killed Crassus, he is
killed on the Ides of March, which might
be when this episode comes out,
in 44 BC, in the Theater of Pompey,
ironically at the foot of a statue of
Pompey the Great.
The reason they are in the Theater of
Pompey instead of the actual Senate
building is because the Senate building
had been burned down a few years ago and
was currently under reconstruction. So,
they were basically using other large
venues to meet with the Senate. Anyway,
so Caesar gets murdered.
Yes, so this wraps up the story of the
First Triumvirate. Again, what we're
exploring here is in the wake of the
trust in government really not working
and sort of
um
laws of the jungle prevailing, what are
the different sorts of power structures
that emerge and what are the
particularities of different people, how
does that factor in? So, what we've seen
with the First Triumvirate is, oh, you
know, instead of a single dictator, if
you kind of have three who split up the
power and they bounce off it works, but
it's never long-lasting. One of them
might die, one of them might get the leg
up against each other, and when that
happens uh there can only ever be one.
And so, it ultimately ends up in war. In
this case, we see that the victor is
Caesar and because of his
particularities, he might, instead of
executing everyone, he might use what we
call tactical clemency, which is
forgiving people and finding a different
way to go about it. But, nonetheless,
everyone knows he's essentially trying
to establish him self as dictator.
Um
we don't know essentially what would
have happened. He might have continued
to reform the constitution, maybe give
himself more power power, maybe step
down. We don't quite know. It's cut
short by this sort of um yeah,
assassination attempt against him. And
now you have a brief period where people
are like, well, what's going to happen?
Then we'll get into this, which is the
next power struggle, which is, okay, you
have these assassins,
are they going to be able to undo, you
know, two, three centuries of kind of
loss of face and faith in government and
just restore order, or is it going to be
another group of kind of power-hungry
dictators who step in? So, that's
essentially teeing us up. You can
probably guess which direction it will
go.
But, yeah, let's go Chris here into the
fate of these so-called liberators.
I will give you a spoiler alert. It did
not work the way the liberators wanted
it to work out.
So, [laughter] these people declared
themselves the liberators. They actually
had coins minted bragging about
themselves as the liberators of Rome.
And the the coins actually have this
little cap of a freedman, so someone
who'd been released from slavery, and
below it is a dagger. It's It's actually
really quite fascinating.
But, the people of Rome themselves
didn't exactly, you know, rise up in
defense of the republic as they assumed
they might. These people had been
completely exhausted. Something like 15%
of the Roman population had been killed
in civil wars. And they're like,
"This is dumb. And also, it's a bunch of
politicians who are, you know,
peacocking against each other. And
um
it's just hurting the people.
There's nothing good about this. We're
starving because the grain supply is so
intermittent it might as well not exist
properly. We don't actually have jobs.
The infrastructure of the city is
falling apart.
This sucks.
Why should we care about, you know,
rising up in defense of this republic
that's constantly failed us?
We don't Caesar was at least trying to
get something done. He was trying to do
major building projects.
And yet you killed him for that. So,
this is great. You're just here to make
yourself richer, right? So, the people
of Rome are very cynical at this point
for obvious reasons. Their entire lives
and their parents' lives and their
grandparents' lives have been ruled by
by politicians who are so incredibly
corrupt and self-serving that they have
no faith in the system as a whole.
So,
yeah, Caesar's Caesar had actually been
relatively popular as a dictator because
he was getting stuff done and that stuff
that he was getting done was actually
affecting the people and giving them
that stability and those jobs, etc. And
so, here's more instability because
Caesar gotten murdered. They weren't
particularly happy.
So, Caesar in his will had randomly left
uh
one of his relatively unknown relatives
named Octavian as his heir to
everything.
Octavian was 19 years old. He was
I'm going to be showing my age here. He
was effectively a child.
If you think of 19-year-olds in your
life,
they may be at a frat house. They may
be, you know, doing something. They
might be, you know, just joining the
military. Who knows?
I don't think you would put a
19-year-old
in charge of a
assets [snorts] that effectively cover
the entire empire of Rome.
And yet, that's where Octavian was. He
was given Caesar's political power,
Caesar's estate, Caesar's very name. So,
Octavian at this point changes his name
from Octavian Octavianus to
Julius Caesar, Gaius Julius Caesar. So,
this is going to get quite confusing. We
will continue to refer to him as
Octavian or Octavianus
just for the sake of clarity. If we
called him Gaius Julius Caesar,
that would be very confusing and so,
we're just not going to do that. So, you
have Octavian.
And you also have Caesar's right-hand
man, a man named Mark Antony. He had
been Caesar's hatchet man. Whenever
Caesar needed job, Mark Antony was the
one to do it. He was a very good and
competent general. He was a very good
and I mean relatively competent
politician. He was just a very abrasive
person. He didn't necessarily get along
with all these politicians. He was very
cynical. He
basically told them where they could
shove it and ignored all of their
protestations about propriety.
So, Antony wasn't so fond of this
19-year-old kid taking over everything
because Antony himself was a 40-year-old
man who had a an enormous amount of
experience by Caesar's side. Again,
Octavian had not. He was just out of
school effectively. So,
they did a quick rehab on Caesar's
memory at his funeral basically saying,
"Oh, no, Caesar was murdered by all
these people and he was just trying to
help everybody as a savior of the
people." And then Antony leaves the city
because he starts fighting with Octavian
immediately.
That didn't necessarily go over so well.
Octavian raised himself an army
just because that's what you did at this
point. And it was declared a public
enemy. The Senate's like, "Oh, no,
senatus consultum ultimum.
National emergency. We've gotten, you
know, a rogue army on our gates." So,
they sent out the consuls to go meet him
in battle. And with these consuls was
the young Octavian who
the Senate was desperately trying to
mold as, you know,
someone who could actually be competent
but very, very, very malleable because,
again, he's a kid. Cicero was a
especially,
especially expressive on this point that
he wanted to mold Octavian. He wanted
Octavian to be effectively his political
ward.
It did not work. Spoiler alert. So,
these consuls go up in battle against
Antony and it's a very fierce battle and
both consuls are killed. Oh, no, but the
battle is won
by the Senate faction, which is now led,
coincidentally, by Octavian. Oh, no,
what a coincidence. Both the consuls are
dead, but Octavian's in charge. And so,
Octavian, victorious in battle, goes up
to Antony and says,
"Hey, you want to work together?
You want to
um
just take over this whole nonsense
together because, I mean, we can."
And Antony's like, "You know what? I
don't like you, but that sounds like a
great idea." So, Octavian and Antony go
back into Rome together and they uh
basically tell the Senate, "Hey,
we're in charge now." And the Senate
says,
"Okay.
Sounds good."
So, Antony is now declared a persona
grata. He's not non grata. He is now
liked again.
Things happen quickly.
Um and they send themselves
effectively, they're in charge of the
Senate, so they declare, you know, that
the liberators are actually the enemy of
the state. And so, they're going to go
after the liberators. And before they
go, they're going to forge a triumvirate
again, just like Caesar had. And so,
this triumvirate, well, they needed a
third person, so they just grabbed a guy
named Lepidus. We will not talk about
him very much today because he's not
particularly important.
And he was going to be their binder
between the two of them.
And so, they went off to Greece to go
fight the liberators. They, spoiler
alert, they won the war against the
liberators. And then they carved the
Roman Empire up into different parts.
And they would each control a different
part of this empire.
Okay, and let me grab our characters and
move them over onto the map. And part of
that is going to be uh discussing
Agrippa who is going to be kind of key
to the Octavian faction. So let's move
these guys over here and let's continue
our conversation. So Chris, I'm going to
tee you up. You had just said that
essentially we're carving up the empire
so I'm placing our folks across the
board and why don't you go ahead and
walk us through this sort of division?
Yeah, so we have
it's it's actually really interesting
division here.
I'm not going to cover
some parts of it very very very very
closely but Anthony gave himself the
richest half of the empire. He gave
himself the east. So this was Greece,
this was Roman Asia, this was Syria and
effectively Egypt. This is where
most
of Rome's income came from. This was the
rich half of the empire. They had the
grain, the crops, they had the mines,
etc. etc. etc. Very very very well
developed, very well built up.
Octavian got Hispania and Gallia which
doesn't actually seem like a good deal
if you really think about it. Gaul had
just been conquered by his adopt father
in a major war. Hispania had basically
been constantly revolting for the last
150 years since Rome took it over.
But he was right next to Italy
and so he was the closest to the center
of power. Italy was considered you know
safe zone for all three of all three
technically controlled Italy. Great.
Fantastic. Um Lepidus was given North
Africa cuz no one else wanted that and
these islands in the Mediterranean,
Sardinia, Corsica and Sicilia were
actually Pompey Magnus's sons domain and
he was
he was he effectively established a
seafaring nation that was heavily based
on piracy and controlling the grain
supply. So these people had to work
through Sextus Pompey.
We're not going to talk about him too
too too much because that would be we've
got to we've got to keep going.
But if you want us to talk about that
empire, feel free to tell us in the
comments as as I regularly say. So
they they split up the empire and they
go off to their own little course.
Hopefully they can cooperate. Octavian
is very very very lucky in that he's a
very
he's he's quite young, but he's a very
smart person and he has surrounded
himself with exceptionally competent
people.
The most competent of these is another
man named Agrippa who is just 1 year
older than him. They are best friends,
they've grown up together. Agrippa is a
genius.
Octavian is extremely wealthy. He's
brilliant in politics. He's got the
family name, the whole nine yards.
Agrippa
is a logistical genius. He's also a
military genius.
He's very very very very very very very
capable of getting things done
and not just the getting things done
part, but the getting things to the
point that the objective can be
completed and also
after the objective is completed making
sure that everything stays stable after
that. And he applies his brilliance to
ruling
these provinces. He applies his
brilliance to building projects. He
applies obviously his building to
military. Agrippa is just an
aggressively competent person who is
also
completely and unflinchingly loyal to
Octavian. And that that part is perhaps
most important. He not once in his life
does he ever try to backstab Octavian in
any way, shape, or form.
So, that's basically where we where we
see this character Agrippa come from.
And we'll refer back to him as as this
episode goes on.
So, Octavian starts really consolidating
political control and very heavily
spending a lot of time in Rome and
leaning on the Roman Senate and
aggregating power there. This is
actually where we see
Um this is where we see
the second Triumvirate's proscriptions
come in.
Uh in 42 BC, right after the battle that
ended the Liberator War. Sorry, this is
on the previous slide. All three
uh Antony, Octavian, and Lepidus all
meet in Rome. And they say, "Okay, we're
going to conduct a purge of all the
people we don't like because clemency
didn't seem to work, so we're going to
do the opposite of that." And so, they
effectively had a giant list of people
in Rome that they didn't like and they
would trade each other names off the
list. So,
for example, Antony really, really,
really hated
uh
Cicero.
Well, Octavian liked Cicero, but you
know what?
He would trade away Cicero if Antony
would give him a few names off of his
list and so on and so on.
It got to the point where over 2,000
equestrians and a third of the Senate
was murdered by these three people
because either they wanted to steal
their money, they had a personal grudge,
they had disagreeing political opinions,
or maybe they just felt like it.
And they didn't bother with any of these
fancy auctions, they just took all of
their property and all of their money
and all of their stuff. Um so, all three
of these men became extremely wealthy
extremely quickly after, you know,
murdering
again, most of the political society of
Rome. Right when it was beginning to
recover, too. We saw what happened with
Marius and Sulla after this happened.
And effectively happened again, where
they murdered everyone with a backbone
or anyone who may have grown a backbone.
There was no one to stand up to these
three, and they took full advantage of
that.
So then Antony goes off to his uh
eastern province and starts that war
with Parthia.
This is starting to sound very
repetitive. Anyway, he loses horribly in
Parthia, but at least he doesn't die. So
he retreats back to his provinces, goes
back to Egypt, and starts a torrid love
affair with the queen of Egypt, uh woman
named Cleopatra.
Uh the last of her dynasty.
And she's actually uh Cleopatra's a
really, really, really fascinating
figure.
Um especially in that a lot of what we
know and a lot of what's been passed
down and a lot of the ways we see
Cleopatra is shaped by what Octavian is
doing over in Italy.
See, Octavian wasn't just sitting on his
laurels. He wasn't just consolidating
political control and making sure
everyone saw him as the man in charge.
He wasn't just, you know, clearing out
everyone he didn't like and making sure
only the people he liked got elected.
He was also friends with a man named
Maecenas, who is a shadowy figure uh for
the most part, but is a very, very,
very, very passionate patron of the
arts.
And so what Maecenas did and helped
Octavian do is completely fashion a
narrative and a propaganda
culture and phenomenon, where he would
commission poets to say the things that
Octavian wanted to say. He would have
art commissioned, which is something
that Octavian wanted to be shown. He
would have sculptures made, which is
something that Octavian, you know, would
would show Octavian in the best possible
light.
And he would badmouth Antony
in every possible way.
And so a lot of this a lot of this
badmouthing took, you know, it took
multiple roots of Antony is a brute who
is an idiot and he's the worst and also
at the same time Antony is a proud Roman
who's been seduced by this evil Egyptian
queen who's using her witchy womanly
wiles to drag him into her bed and to
corrupt this proud Roman soul and he is
no longer a Roman man and we can mourn
the Roman that he once was but he is
dead now effectively because he has been
bewitched by this exotic queen of the
Nile.
And that's actually a lot of what we see
today in a lot of films and a lot of TV
and a lot of writing is, you know,
Cleopatra is this mysterious exotic
creature who, you know, is witchy and
beguiling and etc. etc. etc. When it
turns out she was just a very very very
clever woman who
did what she could for Egypt's own
advantage.
Basically.
Um anyway, this propaganda really takes
root. Antony is effectively besmirched
um and Octavian takes complete control
of the Roman political scene. So it
doesn't matter that Antony is in charge
of the half of the money the half of the
empire with money. Octavian is in charge
of the power.
And in this case the power beats the
money.
So Octavian finishes consolidating this.
He has the Senate declare war on Egypt
and Cleopatra, not on Antony. Antony
just happens to be there, you know, and
you wouldn't declare war on a fellow
Roman.
It's not Octavian's fault if Antony
decides to lead Cleopatra's armies now,
is it?
So, they engage in a relatively minor
war as things go, uh that end that's
ended with the decisive battle at
Actium, which is a naval battle. Their
land armies never actually fight here,
even though they're camped right across
from each other. Um
Octavian's navy is commanded by Agrippa,
and Cleopatra's navy is actually helmed
by both Antony and Cleopatra themselves.
Uh Antony and Cleopatra decisively
defeated, they're barely able to break
free of uh Agrippa's blockade,
and they flee back to Egypt.
Antony promptly commits suicide, and
Cleopatra shortly thereafter [snorts]
also commits suicide um when she is
captured and it's becomes really obvious
that she's just going to be taken as a
prize of war, paraded, and then executed
however Octavian wants to execute her.
Her children are also executed,
specifically the children that she had
with Julius Caesar, because you don't
want
uh
you don't want potential claimants to
your own power that might threaten your
control.
Yes, so that wraps up the second
Triumvirate, and maybe history could
have gone on and we could have had a
third and a fourth Triumvirate, the
cycle repeating itself, but at this
point um
so many people in the political class
have been wiped out that there's no real
other big strong man, power has been so
centralized that at this point there is
kind of a reigning person who is able to
stop the cycle, and uh
a lot of that is owed to the fact that
people are just tired of this, and they
want they're they're kind of willing to
settle with one man coming out on top if
it means all the back and forth sniping
and executions and civil wars can stop.
Um and so that brings us to Augustus,
he's going to end the second
Triumvirate, and he's now going to take
power, and essentially this gets us
officially into the period of the
Empire, although this weird transition
point is
kind of claiming that the Republic is
still around and it's it's masqueraded
around
as if it were still alive. So you use
the trappings of the Republic to excuse
kind of this new form of government
where Augustus is essentially the the
first man. So yeah, we'll be going over
a little bit of the Augustan reforms,
what he does, how he sort of
you know
puppets around the corpse of the
Republic and how that sets us up for the
future.
Again, this question of how does the
power transfer from one leader to the
next in this new system is going to
continue to haunt Rome over the years.
They never really do get a good
solution, but it's going to always be
within the framework of well, we're an
empire now and it's not going back to
you know, the the Senate or the old
system of the Republic. So it's a new
succession of
power that's a question, but again
within a new framing that we would see
as an empire.
So yeah, Chris take us back to I guess
Augustus seizing power and kind of how
he he
knocks off this this transition.
Yeah, so I've got to re-emphasize a
couple points really fast here just
because it's really easy just to go
through the course of events, not pause
and really reflect. Augustus has been in
charge of the city of Rome for about 15
years now as the person who is in
charge. He hasn't just been here and
there and everywhere. He has been
aggressively taking charge of the city
of Rome over the last 15 years.
The people that's effectively an entire
generation.
The people who are coming to power in
Rome only know Augustus
as we now call him, formerly Octavian,
as the power in Rome. He was the person
who ruled in Rome. And he was pretty
young when he came to you know, when he
did this. Like, he's not a particularly
old man when he takes charge. It's only
been 16 years since the death of his
father, and he's spent those that entire
time
taking control.
And so, I like I'm trying to drive that
point home where 15 years is a really,
really long time for one person to be in
charge, especially when that person's
just in his mid-30s
by the time he is the sole ruler.
>> [snorts]
>> So,
the con- the the conversation is
the the population of Rome is exhausted
at this point. I'm pretty sure any of
you guys who put yourself in the
situation can see how these people are
so tired. They were tired when Julius
Caesar was killed. This last 10 years
has finally been some semblance of like
stability has been coming back. It was a
There was a lot going on in those 10
years, you know, they
Octavian had to put down the pirates
that Sextus Pompey was bouncing around
with. He had to contend with all of
these other
major politicians like uh Antony and
Lepidus who were trying to usurp some of
this power here and there. There were
interruptions in the grain supply, but
it was clear that Octavian kept
restoring order. He kept bringing it
back. No matter what the disruptions
were, he kept coming back and fixing it.
He never just let it go because it
wasn't his in his interest.
He solved it, and he made things run
smooth- more smoothly than they had
been.
Another thing that I've got to
re-emphasize here, and I I think I
emphasized it a little bit earlier, but
I'm going to do it again.
There was no one alive who remembered a
time before the civ- this kind of civil
conflict.
Their parents did not remember a time
before this. Their grandparents and
great-grandparents and
great-great-grandparents did not
remember a time before this kind of
civil conflict.
They didn't have the internet back then.
They only had, you know, oral and
written history, however much there was.
So, they'd learn through those lenses.
Yeah, sure. But, they did not remember a
time before what it was like to actually
experience these people
with their greed and their corruption
just taking control for their own
benefit. No one remembered a time
where, you know, there's this golden age
of the Republic. Yeah, that's all well
and good until you have your lived
experience and you can see that's not
how things work. There is no golden age.
Everyone sucks. Everyone's the worst.
Everyone's corrupt just taking things
for themselves.
No one remembered any sort of good
government out of this Roman Republic or
what we refer to as the Republican
period of Rome.
And I feel like that's really important
to mention is
when you don't have any memory of good
government out of something, you really
desperately want some someone who brings
a form of good government. And that's
what Octavian was promising. In all
those 15 years, he kept returning things
to stability. Things would happen and
then he would fix them. He was the
person who,
to use a very tired phrase, made the
trains run on time.
He might not have been the best, but man
did he bring order, stability, and a
form of peace that these people had
never felt before in their entire lives.
So, you have all of these, you know,
incredibly corrupt politicians and all
of these,
you know, focus on personal reward and
stuff. But, when there's only one person
in charge, it's basically him who's
allowing corruption or not. And
ironically, at this point, that actually
reduces the corruption. I'm not
actively, for what it's worth, in all of
this, I'm not advocating for a dictator.
I'm just saying here, in this specific
case, Augustus brought a lot more
stability than the Roman Republic.
That being said, the government system,
as we covered at the very top of the
first part,
um the government system was still
called res publicae, the public matter.
It's still just the public thing.
It's called the res publica for hundreds
of years to come. It's not called the
Roman Empire. It's called res publica,
the government.
The function of that government did
effectively completely change with
Augustus, though. And that really stems
from all people wanting is safety,
stability, affordable food and housing,
available jobs, and general security and
agency.
That's all. That people just want to be
able to live.
And they want a government that allows
them to do that.
So, Augustus
can't you know, comes back to Rome in 27
and
he focused very heavily on Rome's
development. And he appointed people
like the aforementioned Agrippa to help
him take care of that. And so, this is
where he starts building the city of
Rome,
especially the infrastructure,
especially the things that had been,
frankly, left to ruin just because no
one could be bothered to fix them
because it wasn't necessarily in their
political interests.
It's the same as someone running on the
promise to fix the potholes. He fixed
the potholes and he actually focused on
doing it and he was actually seen doing
it. So, it's one of those things where
he's not only stable, he's seen as a
just man.
Which I cannot emphasize enough how
important that is for someone to be seen
as relatively just in a system where
everyone had lost faith in the courts
and lost faith faith in justice itself.
He
was a an incredibly stable politician,
partly because all anyone who might have
competed with him had been murdered.
There were some people during his reign
that tried to
buck the system or, you know, rise up
against him in some way or run for
office without without him approving of
it and sometimes him expressly
disapproving of it, and those people
never got far. Either they
died mysteriously, incredibly
mysteriously, you understand,
or they just never got elected in the
first place.
He would allow some dissent. He'd allow
the Senate to speak out against him.
It's no problem.
But he wouldn't allow them to vote
against him. And that's the key thing.
He never appointed himself, you know, to
offices. He was elected to consul a
bunch of times, but he wasn't always the
consul. He was the tribune.
The He was he had a perpetual position
as the tribune of the plebs, and he was
the only one that had the right of veto.
So he could veto anything he didn't
like.
He had a perpetual position as censor,
the the guy who was able to appoint
people to the Senate. And, you know, in
in many cases, a lot of
logistical tasks were appointed to the
censors. For example, like the agrarian
reforms of the Gracchi, that was the
censors. They conducted the censuses,
so to count the people of Rome and to
put them into different tribes. So he
was responsible for counting the Roman
citizens and making sure that their
elections got handled appropriately.
He sorted out
all of these Band-Aids.
He would take off the Band-Aids, but
then he would fix the underlying
structure so that it could stand on its
own.
And so it wasn't
it wasn't a quick fix and it wasn't
something that he ever gave up doing. He
was He never called himself the dictator
or appointed himself dictator for life
cuz he never needed to. He didn't need
any of that. He was a He was given the
title of pater patriae, father of the
people,
but
that's not even something he really
needed to to push for because he was in
charge and because this was his
lifetime's work was to rebuild the Roman
state.
Yes, and the again to recap the major
point here is um
he's essentially cleared all other ways
for people to get power. He is then
taking all the kind of previous
uh nameplates of the positions of the
old republic, keeping them in position,
but then kind of replumbing, re-wiring
them, making sure he controls them. If
someone else does run for consul, it's
only with his say-so. So it's a republic
kind of a name only only, but behind the
scenes everything kind of funnels up to
Augustus. Uh and like Chris says, a lot
of important reforms do help the people.
Uh on the military front, which we
didn't talk about, he does these grand
reforms, demobilized a lot of the army,
helps move it to like a full
professional force, brings in like
praetorians, and does all this stuff
that actually does make the Roman
a kind of a new a fresh coat of paint
and I think it's famous I think it's for
him. He said he found Rome like a city
of what is it like Yeah, a city of
bricks and left it a city of marble.
That's right. So there's all these
sayings and yeah, a ton of stuff, but
again, the vestiges it's important to
keep that that veneer of the republic in
place because it has such a an important
critical part in the Roman
consciousness. Even like you said, it's
been centuries since anyone actually
experienced that republic, but the idea
uh lives long and has a strong kind of
power and foundation to it. Um so that's
yeah, Augustus's reign is pretty stable.
There are some reversals during his
reign, uh but he still stays as a sole
power and kind of sorts this out.
Eventually, he knows he is going to die
and he wants to leave a stable situation
after him. So, this is where we have a
new question of how does power transfer
over the generations? Okay, now it's not
going to be these civil wars as we saw
before
over the Republic. It's going to be over
this new kind of quasi Republic in name
only but a real empire. How does this
succession work? We don't know. Is it
going to be like does he have kids? Is
it like a monarchy or do you choose an
heir? Various emperors down the line are
going to choose different formulations.
Maybe they'll split the empire. All of
these are going to be questions to come.
But in the immediate short-term for
Augustus, I think Chris you've
identified that it just so happened that
he had no direct male heirs. And so,
he's sort of forced to pick an heir at
this point in time.
Yeah, and it was apparently through no
want of trying. He tried for a male heir
for his entire life and it just never
happened.
Um he did have a daughter
and he
Her story is actually quite sad. She was
used as a
effectively a bargaining chip. So,
Augustus would trade her effectively to
any man he needed to to establish that
alliance.
Um and she was swapped around a fair bit
before she eventually got exiled for
being uppity.
But um
the problem was like he he'd effectively
choose an heir. So, he would groom
someone, give them a whole bunch of
major political positions, and really
slowly introduce them to the political
world. The first of these was Agrippa.
Agrippa was Augustus's first heir.
Um the problem was Agrippa died.
So, Augustus had to go back to the
drawing board. He's like, "Okay,
Agrippa is dead, but Agrippa had a
couple of kids and they were very
popular kids. They were brilliant. They
were really good at what they did. They
went on military campaigns. They were
very very very popular with the soldiers
and the people and even the politicians
liked them and oh, they both died.
Well, that's a problem. So, then he
picks his final pick is Livia's first
son from her previous marriage. And this
is a man named Tiberius and it wasn't he
was not particularly popular with
Augustus. They'd had falling out. Uh
Tiberius had gone into self-imposed
exile a few times over in Greece and
from what it sounds like he very much
preferred the exile to dealing with
anything in Rome. Um but Augustus needed
an heir. He needed a successor to all of
his political power and so he recalled
Tiberius and said, "Okay,
we're going to make you the next in
line." And so he This is where you start
seeing Tiberius really get heavily
involved in Roman politics because
Augustus shoves him into it. Tiberius
becomes Augustus's
man whenever he needs something. When uh
Teutoburg Forest happened, he sends out
Tiberius to stabilize the situation.
When the revolts in Illyria happened
right after that, Tiberius takes his
armies from Germany and goes down to
Illyria and solves that problem as well.
Tiberius is actually
an exceptionally competent person. He's
just not particularly likable and he
doesn't like people. He's compared to
someone who grinds his teeth very slowly
and loudly. He will get things done, but
he's not going to do it slowly,
methodically, at his own pace and he's
not necessarily going to make friends
doing so.
His soldiers really liked him. And the
reason his soldiers really liked him is
because Tiberius would do everything he
possibly could with it within his
military strategies to make sure those
soldiers lived and to conduct his
military strategies with as little risk
as possible and the largest chance of
success as possible. So, the soldiers
really liked him.
Politicians didn't like him all that
much because he didn't do exciting
things. He didn't go on these bold
random campaigns like Germanicus did
into the heart of Germany to tear out
the heart of, you know, all of these
evil tribes. No, no. Tiberius would set
up a perimeter and then he would move
that perimeter by a relatively small
amount every single day, consolidating
control, burning everything in the area,
making sure that
there was no way his opponents could
actually fight effectively, besieging
anyone he actually fought, which worked
brilliantly. He never lost a battle. Um
he's maligned by ancient historians
especially because he was not popular,
he was not fun, he didn't engage in
politics, and he didn't like politics.
Again, he was an introvert. He didn't
like people.
But, when Augustus died and Tiberius
took control, he proved to be an
exceptionally
stable person to maintain that control.
Again, he's maligned by ancient
historians. We don't have time to get
into all of those rumors here.
It's unclear how many of those rumors
are actually true. What we can say about
him,
confirmed by both archaeology and
uh and the histories themselves, is Rome
just became more and more wealthy while
Tiberius was in charge. The the trade
routes with India, between Rome and
India, absolutely exploded in this
period. And the biggest find
uh from Rome in Italy these days is
actually coins with Tiberius's head on
them.
That shows, you know, exactly how much
trade just completely exploded with
India. The wealth of Rome itself was
unimaginably massive. He made sure that,
you know, not only the
that Augustus's reforms remain steady.
He made sure the Senate remained under
control even if he did so from a
distance. He made sure that the
politicians were under his control
again, even if from a distance.
And he ensured that the financial
stability of the empire was completely
sound.
Effectively minimizing corruption as
much as possible and maximizing Again,
it sounds really really really boring to
say this, but it's essential. The
bureaucratic logistics were absolutely
fine-tuned.
So, he's not he's a very
follow-the-rules kind of guy. He's not
flashy. He's not popular.
But he is exceptionally competent. And
that is how the republic transitions
into the empire beyond Augustus. Is you
have a very competent person in charge
who is very stable, doesn't rock the
boat too much outside of, you know, the
political sphere that doesn't affect the
vast vast vast majority of people. He's
popular with the military, popular with
the people, and the political
establishment can tolerate him.
And he's able to continue actively
controlling them. So, Tiberius's reign
very much in some ways is an extension
of Augustus.
He makes it his own.
But he continues with that groundwork.
And when that foundation is laid as
heavily as these two men made it,
it's really hard to keep it's really
hard to shatter that.
And that's how stability came back,
which is kind of heartbreaking to see,
but uh
the monarchy worked.
Yes, with Augustus and the succession in
place that then gets us into the empire.
As Chris said, it's going to be hard to
kind of undo this whole process. So,
with that being said, we're going to
leave the fate of the empire, leave that
to a separate discussion, and we're
going to now sort of close in on our
conclusions. Uh we're already touching
on a couple themes that we just wanted
to end with. The first is going to be
the idea that this is overall been a
gradual process. We want to hammer that
home again. We will then focus on again
recapping sort of what are the major
factors of rot at the core of the
republic, at least as far as we've
identified them. Uh we're going to look
over the consequences of that rot and
how it started to fall and what were the
dominoes. And then finally, we don't
want to get lost in the overall kind of
uh macro trends. We want to make sure to
remember that there is humans at the
core of all this. We'll touch real
quickly on the human story. Uh and then
finally, we might make some
recommendations on a few books to book
up to pick up.
So, yeah, let's get started with the
gradual process. Here, again, keep in
mind that when we're talking about the
republic, it's spanning multiple
centuries in this case. Where you decide
to declare that the republic is falling
or has fallen is very up to debate. Um
so, that's the main point here. It's
subjective. Uh but for us, the major
thing to note is that um
from the perspective of the ground
level, if you zoom in on the human
lifespan, you're operating within one of
these centuries, and you're in the kind
of the unknown of the time where there's
no internet. You know, it's very hard to
know what's going on. You're very
myopic. All of this looks very different
when experienced from the ground level.
Uh and it's only when we have the
advantage of hindsight and historians
and our uh desire to put things in clean
buckets and sequences does this kind of
start to make sense. But we want to
ground you in the idea that this is all
a gradual process that was very, very
messy uh once you strip away kind of the
simplicities of history books. Uh we'll
get into our major factors, but Chris,
any final thoughts on sort of the this
gradual process idea?
Yeah, no. So, I just wanted to follow up
with that a little bit. Um, mostly,
again, my background is in social
history in a lot of ways. So,
re-emphasizing just the view from the
ground. And like none of this, as you
said, nothing of this was inevitable.
None of this was planned out. Part of
the problem with the Roman Republic is
that none of this was planned out, as
I've said over and over and over again.
This was a city-state government. This
was not a planned government. This was
not a great, you know, okay, well, this
is how the empire is going to work. No,
this was a city-state government that
ran into issues when it kept expanding
and so it kept making up solutions to
fill those issues. And so,
that doesn't
actually work in the end because you
also have to deal with the human factor.
You know, the the actual people who are
having to deal with the consequences of
these these decisions, but also
the people who are going to be in
charge. You have to deal with the
inevitable corruption, the inevitable
greed. You have to deal with
people who break the laws and how you
actually confront those people because
if you effectively give people a carte
blanche to break break laws, they are
going to break the laws and they are
going to ignore any laws that they don't
feel like following.
So,
we can look at this, as you said,
historian, the job of an historian is to
make this stuff comprehensible, to make
it something that we can make a
presentation on and we can have a
discussion on for a few hours and
actually cover hundreds of years. But,
this is such a messy time and
people in 100 would not be able to
recognize the people from 200. And the
people from, you know, the time of
Augustus would not be able to recognize
the people of 100. They're just
completely different because there was
so much change happening all the time.
The problem is the change never actually
gave anything back to the people at the
bottom.
Yes, and this gets us to the messiness
of it all.
When people go and talk about the fall
of Republic, there are all sorts of
factors or historical threads or
narratives that you could follow.
We had chosen to follow on these.
Again, this isn't the end all be all,
but these were some of the sort of the
main movers
we thought. So, we'll cover these again
just to recap for you, but it's not this
isn't exclusively. But for us, we were
identifying that it's you know, the
forever wars. In one sense, it's the
reason why we talk so much about the
Roman Empire because they were so
successful militarily,
but at the same time victims of their
own success. These forever wars
have consequences and the fact that you
start off with the militia and you can
scale it meant that you had these issues
that came out of that. If you're
fighting forever war abroad, very
distantly, your militia can't go home.
You no longer can function as a regular
citizen. Your family's impoverished. So,
now you have
you're undercutting your entire military
at this point. And the benefits of this
conquest while it's undercutting sort of
the everyday person, especially the
soldiers, there is some benefit, but
it's disproportionately going towards
the top. So, we talked about wealth
consolidation, lot of fundia, that has
all sorts of deleterious effects. In the
political realm, it means that people
can start throwing around their money a
lot more. It leads to more corruption
and bribery and lack of faith in
government. So, all sorts of issues.
These are tensions that are somewhat
resolved over time within the government
through this sort of band-aid system as
the
city expands and has to reconcile with
the fact that it's expanding. Okay, we
need new laws, we need new positions, we
need new number of magistracies, but
also inside, we need to address these
issues of corruption and wealth
consolidation. So, it's all very
hodgepodge and it's so confusing and so
messed up that by the time you get to
sort of what we would call the late
Republic, it's a very gummed up
situation where pressure is building
things are getting worse for the
everyday person. They want release of
that and this is what leads you to the
consequences. People are fed up, the
current system isn't working populism as
we've seen throughout history
is sort of that relief valve. People are
desperate for their needs to be met but
as we see with Roman history here, it's
easily co-opted and we see it co-opted
by politicians who often times are at
the top of the cake who are like, "Oh,
you know, I can get even higher up on
this cake by trying to placate the
people or undercutting my rivals by
playing upon the people." Uh and they do
so and they try and cut through the
government kind of gummed up works by
sometimes working within the laws or
stretching the laws or often breaking
the norms
uh and they find that it's easier to
break than to build in the situation.
They give often times crumbs to the
people who support them but they take
the bulk of the benefits and take that
home to them. Uh this leads to power
consolidation but as power consolidates
and it's revealed that, "Oh, this is
actually how this new kind of world
operates." then you have different
actors who are going to use those same
mechanisms of power.
Uh when power goes against power
all that's left is raw power and
violence and then you get a negative
feedback loop of more and more violence
every time opens up a new norm, the
people are used to it and it becomes
something that is sort of acceptable or
at least someone's shown that you can do
it. So, if you don't find a way to
quickly sort of de-escalate that
situation, uh it spiral spirals rather
quickly. And so, just to zoom back out,
we saw a couple instances of that of how
it was sort of resolved in various
cases. So, in one case here, it was
well, two people who seize power, march
on Rome and they just kill their rivals.
That didn't really work because they
tried to leave power and they're like,
"Okay, I'm kind of done killing people.
Now, let me sort of pretend that it's
business as usual." That again and
devolves. The next sort of power sharing
structure we have is these triumvirates,
where it's not a single person, but it's
multiple of them
making quasi alliances to rule Rome, so
that okay, we'll kill everyone else, but
between us, we're not going to kill each
other. But then time passes, the
stability of these alliances erode, and
then you're left back into quabbling
between powers. We see this happening
once with the first triumvirate, a
second time, but after the second one,
so much time has elapsed, so much
precedence has been eroded, that there's
no real going back to the way things
were. You would need a big overhaul, and
um that's how you sort of get to the
empire. Presumably, Rome might have been
able to go back to republic if you had
these further triumvirates, maybe the
empire could have been broken out into
different regions that then have their
own governments or whatever, but as
Chris had talked about the fact that
Augustus is able to bring so much peace
and benefit to the people and have a
stable succession, means that sort of
the runway is set for a continuation on
the road to empire.
So, that is mostly it in terms of macro
trends, but we shouldn't forget that all
of this, although trends might push us
in certain directions, there are
inflection points that are sort of
guided by the specifics of individuals,
whether they died or not, how old they
are, their capabilities and all that
stuff. So, we shouldn't forget the human
story either at this sort of top level
politician
uh
level that we get heard of in the
history books, but then also just what
this means for the everyday person that
goes unnamed. So, Chris, maybe give us
some final thoughts on sort of the human
story and how that's important to
remember in the context of these broader
trends that we've been trying to hit
home.
Yeah, so again, my background is very
much in social history, and that means I
like to tell stories from the
perspective of people who are actually
living through certain events. And so,
these events obviously were massive and
a huge amount, especially in the first
century, so 100 to zero, a huge amount
of the story there is really driven by
major figures because well,
a whole bunch of minor figures got
murdered because they disagreed with
said major figures. So, you have all
these big names and these big faces,
but the story that we've told today is a
very human story. It's not just those
big faces. It's all of the invisible
faces underneath them and all of the
people of Rome and the development that
they went through throughout this entire
time. It's the story of the greed of the
wealthy and how they kept trying to get
more and more and more even though they
had more than they could ever use. It's
the corruption of the politicians, how
they kept trying to again get more and
more and more
no matter what, no level of power, of
authority, of wealth, of fame, it was
never enough for them. This is the story
of the pain of the poor, of how all of
the greed of the politicians and the the
other wealthy individuals really just
took from them. It took their homes, it
took their ancestral lands, it took
their farms, it took their money, it
took everything, their way of life.
And they had to pick up the pieces from
there.
So,
and one way they, you know, were told
that they could pick up the pieces was
by punching down. So, you see these
agrarian these populist
things that are trying to get these
people to, you know, rally for a cause
and often that cause is punching someone
weaker than them.
You need some You need to way to make
your people happy? Rally them around an
enemy. Maybe that enemy is, you know,
uh the Greeks or the Seleucids across
the sea. Maybe that enemy is just those
darn people who are camping on the
public lands of Rome. Those are public
lands of Rome, so they're clearly meant
for the Roman people. So, we can punch
down on those people all day.
And so, you have again
a very human story. The Romans had a
distinct desire to be remembered.
Wealthy Romans who were able to own a
house, uh actually had busts or face
masks of all of their ancestors. And
they would, you know, line the halls and
they were they had inscriptions of all
of those ancestors' great deeds. And
every single one of them wanted their
own great deeds to be greater than the
ancestors.
Shocking as this might sound, infinite
growth is not actually a valid solution.
You're not always going to be able to do
more and more and more because at some
point
there just isn't more that you can do.
Sometimes, you know, meeting those
expectations, that's already a really
incredible feat. Instead of trying to
get more power, more authority, more
achievements, more deeds, more things to
be written on your death plaque.
Most people, the common people that we
are talking about, the ones who, you
know, suffered through all of this,
frankly. What they actually wanted, what
they actually needed was really basic
stuff. They wanted stability. They
wanted agency. They wanted the ability
to, I know, God forbid, they wanted the
ability to feed themselves. And they
wanted
water to drink. And they wanted a roof
over their heads. They wanted a life
that they could live with dignity.
And that
is,
ironically, the only person who actually
gave that to the people of Rome was the
was the person who took ultimate power
over all of Rome.
Yeah. So, that concludes our story
today. Again,
people throughout the ages have compared
various empires to the Roman Empire.
Parallels can be drawn to today. Um but
as we've shown here, a lot of the
nuances do come down to the specifics of
how the government system was set up. I
don't think there's direct comparisons
that can be told. But there are some
broader trends and sort of kind of how
humans respond to incentives
and how, you know, power can corrupt and
and all that. So anyways, that
discussion, that parallel can be drawn
by others. But for now, we'll point you
to the work of historians and academics
who we recommend that cover this period.
So Chris, uh maybe give a a quick
rundown here of some book
recommendations.
Yeah, it was actually kind of
challenging to make this cuz when um
when I was looking around, especially
for the books I've read,
I noticed that there are not that many
books that really cover this period in
its entirety. There are books that
cover, you know, the broad strokes of
what happened with the Republic. And
there are books that cover certain
periods of the Republic. There's, you
know, books on the Spartacus war or
books on the Sertorian war, books on
different wars and different large-scale
things, but there aren't that many that
really take a focus on
the end of the Roman Republic and how it
fell. The only one that I
>> [clears throat]
>> I could actually find that is a by an
author that I quite like. He became
famous for his podcast. Um which is if
you've never listened to Mike Duncan's
History of Rome,
it is very long. It is very thorough,
and it is very well done. Um the audio
quality increases over time as so many
things do, but he goes through things
very, very, very beat by beat over, you
know, hundreds and hundreds of episodes.
But uh yeah, no, so he wrote this book
on the uh the end of the Roman Republic,
uh which is absolutely worth a read.
Some of the other books are really
focused around the end, the uh the
figures at the end. So, I actually
included Goldsworthy's biographies on
both Caesar and Augustus here. And I
actually find both of them individually
very very very useful. Goldsworthy as an
author is someone that I actually quite
like because he takes the care to
present his work to an educated
non-specialist, someone who is
you know, he doesn't have to explain
everything to, but he can paint you the
broader picture and you will understand
where things happen and why things
happen. He actually paints a broader
picture of the city and the society and
the empire of Rome
rather than just these figures that he's
focusing on. They're at the center of
his stories, but they are not the
entirety of his stories. And so, I think
that both of
both of these biographies are frankly
quite essential to understanding the
late Republic. Uh the final one that I
wanted to put out here is um
is this biography of Cicero. And as I
said earlier today, I think Cicero is
one of the least His name is very well
known and people do not know much about
him because he's like, "Oh, yes, there
was Cicero. He was a Roman." And they
don't really know about him.
Cicero is the reason that we know so
much about the late Republic. I cannot
emphasize that enough. His letters are
absolutely key in all of this. His
writing about it is the foundation of a
lot of knowledge that we have today. You
know, whether or not he's talking about
talking himself up, we can read between
some lines there.
But he is not only very honest and very
grounded, he has an enormous amount of
writing. And
weird as it sounds talking about the
Romans because we have a bunch of
content about the Romans,
we don't have much
that survives from that period of time.
The Romans wrote almost everything down
and we have a fraction of a fraction of
a fraction of a percent of that. And
Cicero
himself, just that one man, has a huge
amount of writing. And it is really,
really, really, really crucial to know
his story and how he fits as just a
person who is in this whirlpool of a
tumult of the late Republic as a man who
really idolizes and loves Rome.
He's part of this. He's a corrupt
person. He takes part in really terrible
things. There's one one letter where he
writes laughing about, you know, his
tenants that are living in apartments
made of plywood, and he's like, "Well,
one of them collapsed. I guess there was
no one in there at the time, so that was
good, but gives me the opportunity to
build another one. That's another story
higher and make some more money off of
it." He was a corrupt guy. He wasn't a
perfect guy,
but he's a really, really, really
interesting person who does seem to want
to have done what is best and seems to
have, by doing that, have made things a
lot worse. So, I I I feel like Cicero's
biography is a really, really, really
fascinating read just because he's a
very flawed character, even even by his
own realizations. And so, that's my
final recommendation.
Nice. Thank you for taking us through
this journey, Chris. Again, this has
been sort of part two. If you missed
part one, go back and watch it. We cover
a lot of the setup for the fall of
Republic. I think both of these combined
are better at telling the story in its
totality, but again, this is only just
our take. So, reach out, find other
sources. Hopefully, this has been both
entertaining and elucidating, and let us
know below in the comments if you have
any recommendations for other topics
you'd like us to sort of dive into in
this format. I find it's a lot more
approachable. You can listen to it in
podcast style, and it's something I want
to do sort of more of moving forward.
So, again, thank you all. Thank you,
Chris, and we'll see you in the next
one.
Cheers. You guys stay care.